Arnatious/nodl (#3)
ubuntu-robotics/design: articles/ros_node_idl.md

It therefore calls for the creation of a standardized way to explicitly define and export this information.

This article defines a high-level abstraction allowing upstream packages to specify the communication requirements of the nodes in the package, such that the final user, be it a developer or a static analysis tool, can benefit from it.

The Node Definition Language (NoDL) specified in the next section is meant to be distributed alongside its associated package, be it in the source code or a generated release packaging format (e.g. debian).

> Whether the interface is declared or not is up to the package author and should not prevent the correct execution of any system pre-existing the NoDL.

Reviewer: Why have these been broken out into their own sentences instead of remaining a part of the preceding paragraph?

Author: I expanded most single line breaks to double when updating this, I'll recombine these

These assertions results would then be summarized in a logging file for later debugging.

Another example of the usefulness of having a static interface is the ability to create graphical tools for putting a ROS system together.

> Yet another example would be an additional feature in `ros2 pkg create` that would allow a developer to hand it an NoDL and have it generate scaffolding for a node with that interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yet another example would be an additional feature in `ros2 pkg create` that would allow a developer to hand it a NoDL and have it generate scaffolding for a node with that interface.
```

### This is only really useful if it gains significant adoption in upstream packages

It's true that, if not all of the packages in one's system have adopted this, its gains are incomplete.

> 

Reviewer: You're actually making entirely new paragraphs every time you do this. They should be part of the _same_ paragraph, but ROS conventions are to keep each sentence on its own line.

There are a number of possibilities that will help with this issue.

One possibility is to more tightly couple the declared and actual interface by creating a library that consumes the declared interface and creates the corresponding ROS entities.

Another is the fact that, as soon as the node is running, RCL itself (or another `ros2` command) can verify that the actual interface properly corresponds to the declared interface, and can act appropriately.

## Package interface

How do upstream packages specify their interface requirements?

Through a high-level description of all the actions, parameters, services and topics, provided or required, by each node within the package.

The package interface is defined in a separate [XML][xml_wiki] file with suffix `.nodl.xml`. This XML file is exported to the [ament index][ament_index], either manually in the case of python projects or with a helper CMake macro.

The interface may cover only a subset of nodes in a package, as long as the nodes that _are_ covered are done so completely.

Here is an example NoDL for a package containing two nodes:

{% include_relative ros2_nodl/interface_declaration.xml %}

> Once an NoDL file is written, it is exported from either `CMakeLists.txt` or `setup.py`.

Reviewer: As @artivis suggests, I'd move the "for cmake based builds" bit into the section below and just give a hint here:

```suggestion
Once an NoDL file is written, it is exported from either `CMakeLists.txt` or `setup.py` (more details below).
```

> For CMake based builds, the package [`ament_nodl`](https://github.com/ubuntu-robotics/ament_nodl) will provide a a macro `nodl_export_node_description_file()`. That installs the two relevan

Reviewer 2: I'd move that to the `Exporting a NoDL to the Ament Index` section.

Reviewer: Agreed.

> For CMake based builds, the package [`ament_nodl`](https://github.com/ubuntu-robotics/ament_nodl) will provide a a macro `nodl_export_node_description_file()`. That installs the two relevan

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For CMake based builds, the package [`ament_nodl`](https://github.com/ubuntu-robotics/ament_nodl) will provide a macro `nodl_export_node_description_file()`. That installs the two relevan
```

{% include_relative ros2_nodl/package.xml %}

> Note that several NoDL files can be exported, allowing for writing an NoDL file per node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that several NoDL files can be exported, allowing for writing one NoDL file per node if desired.
```

### Exporting a NoDL to the Ament Index

Per the design philosophy of the [ament index][ament_index], we install files in two locations. In the case of a package named `Foo`, we export our NoDL file `foo.nodl.xml` into the package share directory, `share/foo/foo.nodl.xml`. We then place a marker file, `share/ament_index/nodl_desc/foo`. This is either empty or contains the relative path to the `foo.nodl.xml` file.

#### CMake Macro

For packages using ament_cmake, the package `ament_nodl` provides the macro `nodl_export_node_description_file` which performs the above for you.

#### setup.py

> In the case of setup.py, the above must be done manually alongside the placement of the package's marker in the ament index.

Reviewer 2: There is no equivalent to `nodl_export_node_description_file`? Do we envision one?

Reviewer: They don't have anything like that for the package index marker, either. This seems to follow that pattern.

            <xs:attribute name="name" type="xs:string" use="required" />
            <xs:attribute name="type" type="xs:string" use="required" />
            <xs:attribute name="publisher" type="xs:boolean" default="false" />
            <xs:attribute name="subscription" type="xs:boolean" default="false" />
        </xs:complexType>
    </xs:element>

    <xs:element name="node">
        <xs:complexType>
            <xs:choice minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded">
                <xs:element ref="action" />
                <xs:element ref="parameter" />
                <xs:element ref="topic" />
                <xs:element ref="service" />
            </xs:choice>
            <xs:attribute name="name" type="xs:string" use="required" />
            <xs:attribute name="executable" type="xs:string" use="required" />
        </xs:complexType>
    </xs:element>

    <xs:element name="interface">
        <xs:complexType>
            <xs:choice maxOccurs="unbounded">
                <xs:element ref="node"></xs:element>
            </xs:choice>
            <xs:attribute name="version" fixed="1" use="required" />
        </xs:complexType>
    </xs:element>
</xs:schema>

> ```

Reviewer: This would be easier to read using `include_relative`, is there a reason we can't use that, here? I'm also not completely convinced we want to maintain this here. Do other design docs follow the pattern of duplicating XSDs in here? We didn't do that for SROS2, for example. We shouldn't need to maintain the same file in multiple places.

How do upstream packages specify their interface requirements?
Through a high-level description of all the actions, parameters, services and topics, provided or required, by each node within the package.

> The package interface is defined in a separate [XML][xml_wiki] file with suffix `.nodl.xml`. This XML file is exported to the [ament index][ament_index], either manually in the case of python projects or with a helper CMake macro.

Reviewer: Haha, I know this is awful, but: every time you make a period, you need to hit enter. Every time you want to make a new paragraph, you press enter twice. These sentences must be on separate lines, but without a blank line between them.

Attributes:
- **name**: The base name of the node.

> - **executable**: The name of the generated executable the node is contained in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **executable**: The name of the generated executable that contains the node.
```
